Update ITE-10: change step predicates and add selectors (#62)
in-toto/ITE: ITE/10/README.adoc

```
name: string
command: list of strings
expected_inputs: list of artifact rules
expected_outputs: list of artifact rules
expected_predicate: expectedStepPredicate
```

The `expected_inputs` and `expected_outputs` fields replace the original
`expected_materials` and `expected_products` fields, respectively, to generalize
their semantics. This change maintains the core model of the in-toto v1 layout
associating a single predicate with a single step (rather than a single
command). It is also still true that, `expected_inputs` and `expected_outputs`
specify a list of artifact rules against which step inputs and outputs must be
checked. Thus, if two attestations do not share the input and output artifacts,
it is still true that they must belong to different steps.

The `expected_inputs` field retains the current semantics that all steps have
inputs regardless of predicate type, so it applies to all predicates,
informational and transformational, but does the name of the field containing

> the inputs must still be indicated within the `expected_predicate` information.

Reviewer: There's a grammatical issue here and I'm not quite sure what the fix is.

Of course, as informational predicates do not specify output artifacts, the
`expected_outputs` field does not apply to them and may be omitted or left empty
for the corresponding step.

Each `expectedStepPredicate` object has the following schema.

```
predicate_type: string

> inputs_selector: string

Reviewer: :eyes: this is interesting. Do we need outputs_selector?

Two cases:
informational -> inputs is subject, no outputs
transformational -> inputs is predicate specific, outputs is subject

we could have just the inputs_selector, with options `subject` and `predicate.<field>` where the field is set. If it's `predicate.<field>` we can safely assume the contents of subject make up the output. If input_selector is `subject`, then there's no output.

Reviewer 2: Good catch! Actually, we talk about [I/O selectors in the Policy Framework draft](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Tr6jCtTcTB8KpDMp2I1PFuxP7A2nQa5BeuwOy05iuMw/edit?pli=1&tab=t.0#bookmark=id.4g7eqaljs29k).

Author: This is an interesting suggestion. My inclination is to specify things as explicitly as possible so consumers of policies don't need to bake in implicit assumptions into their verification flow. How do others feel about removing `outputs_selector` ?

Reviewer: As things stand, I lean towards merging this in with `outputs_selector`. We might be better positioned to take a call once we PoC this in attestation-verifier perhaps.

command: list of strings
expected_materials: list of artifact rules
expected_products: list of artifact rules
expected_predicate: expectedStepPredicate
```

Each `expectedStepPredicate` object has the following schema.

```
predicateType: string

> materials_selector: string

Reviewer 3: Could we call this `inputs_selector` instead, please?

Author: I also prefer `inputs_selector` but given that we still use `materials` and `products` for the artifact rules, I think the selector names should match. I wouldn't be opposed to switching to `inputs` and `outputs` overall, but wasn't sure if that'd be too big a change.

Reviewer 3: I think since we already changed names for some big things (like attestations instead of links and so on), we might as well take this opportunity to rename this especially because it makes things so much clearer. WDYT?

> products_selector: string

Reviewer 3: Could we call this `outputs_selector` instead, please?

functionaries: list of authorized functionary key IDs
threshold: int
```

The `predicateType` field contains the matching `TypeURI` of the predicate
expected for the step. To support both transformational and informational
predicates that may use different field names to record step materials and/or
products, the `materials_selector` and `products_selector` fields to indicate

> the specific ITE-6 attestation field names verifiers should check for materials

Reviewer 3: I think we want to expand just a bit on how verifiers should check materials/inputs and products/outputs: specifically while checking [v1-style artefact rules](https://github.com/in-toto/specification/blob/v1.0/in-toto-spec.md#433-artifact-rules).

and products, respectively. The original `pubkeys` field is updated to
`functionaries` to generalize signing semantics. Finally, `threshold` applies
per predicate type rather than the step as a whole. Note that this schema
supports the in-toto Attestation Framework while retaining all the capabilities
of in-toto 1.0 layouts.

This change maintains the core model of the original in-toto layout associating
a single predicate with a single step (rather than a single command). It is
also still true that if two attestations do not share the input and output
artifacts, they must belong to different steps. Of course, as informational
predicates do not specify artifact products, the `expectedProducts` field does
not apply to them and may be omitted or left empty for the corresponding step.

> The `expectedMaterials` field functions as it currently does, and applies to all

Reviewer 3: Sorry, not clear to me: do you mean that `expectedMaterials` now refer to subjects by default unless specified otherwise?

Author: This is text from @adityasaky . The intent here is that all steps have `materials`, regardless of the predicate type. It says nothing about which fields those are.

Author: We can add a clarification about this.

Reviewer 3: Yes, please, thanks!

declared with an expected predicate type and when a layout is encountered, the
verifier recursively verifies the sublayout, generating the expected predicates
in the process. Note that this expects the verifier to be capable of generating
distinct predicates--the in-toto v1.0 verifier was only aware of links and
sublayout verification therefore generated an in-toto summary link. This is
discussed further on in <<Custom Verifiers>>.

=== Verifying Artifact Rules

The verification workflow in the in-toto v1.0 specification matches links to
use by the name of the step and the key ID used to sign it. This part of the
workflow is updated to support matching on predicate types as well. In addition,
artifact rules are updated to support
link:https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/resource_descriptor.md[ResourceDescriptor]
defined in the in-toto Attestation Framework. The `name` field in a
ResourceDescriptor object is used for pattern matching and the `digest` field
is used to verify equality of two artifacts.

As in in-toto v.10, the `layoutEnvelope` and `layoutKeys` contain the signed
layout and the signer's keys. The generalized `attestations` parameter is the

> set of in-toto attestations (with any predicate) to be checked against the

Author: @trishankkarthik I'm assuming the `attestations` being input into the Verification flow is the bundle put together by the bundle compiler? And we can also assume there's one attestation in this bundle per step? Want to make sure we're making the same assumptions here.

Reviewer 3: Yes :) Although I don't think we need to talk about the Bundle Compiler here at all, just the Attestation Bundle. The one Attestation (which implies one Predicate Type) per Step makes sense to me.

Author: Ok cool, yeah, I agree. I wasn't going to mention the bundle compiler at this point, just wanted to have the right mental model for when we do talk about it :)

expected for the corresponding step.

The updated in-toto layout specified in this ITE is similar. The step is
declared with an expected predicate type and when a layout is encountered, the
verifier recursively verifies the sublayout, generating the expected predicates
in the process. Note that this expects the verifier to be capable of generating
distinct predicates--the in-toto v1.0 verifier was only aware of links and
sublayout verification therefore generated an in-toto summary link. This is

> discussed further on in <<Custom Verifiers>>.

Reviewer 4: Where is the discussion of the supported languages and custom verifiers?  I'd love to have us choose something really small and sane here which is unlikely to have any security issues.  

Usually running complex code during signature checking is a bad idea.  Since this is running potentially attacker provided code during verification, this should be really locked down.  (I acknowledge and regret how inspections work in the current in-toto layouts, so I'm mostly pointing the finger at myself here.)

Reviewer 3: That discussion is not here: this is specific to just: (1) fixing a step to exactly one predicate type, and (2) introducing I/O Selectors.

The general discussion on policies is [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Tr6jCtTcTB8KpDMp2I1PFuxP7A2nQa5BeuwOy05iuMw/edit?usp=sharing). We do have not a list of supported policy languages and engines, and are not likely to do so. Please see that doc for our rationale on why we want flexibility.

Reviewer 4: I took a look at the document and would love to have more discussion about the pros and cons.  Happy to do this in the document, on this issue, or in another format.  I do think there needs to be more of a comparative discussion resulting from this, regardless of the eventual design choice.

Reviewer 3: Why don't we discuss over a Zoom/Meet and go from there? I'll send out an invitation.

=== Verifying Artifact Rules

The verification workflow in the in-toto v1.0 specification matches links to
use by the name of the step and the key ID used to sign it. This part of the

> workflow is updated to support matching on predicate types as well. In addition,

Reviewer: side note: we don't specify how to match on predicate types; we should consider this but separately.

artifact rules are updated to support
link:https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/resource_descriptor.md[ResourceDescriptor]
defined in the in-toto Attestation Framework. The `name` field in a
ResourceDescriptor object is used for pattern matching and the `digest` field
is used to verify equality of two artifacts.

> As in in-toto v.10, the `layoutEnvelope` and `layoutKeys` contain the signed

Reviewer 5: I think this should be v1.0.

> As in in-toto v.10, the `layoutEnvelope` and `layoutKeys` contain the signed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As in in-toto v1.0, the `layoutEnvelope` and `layoutKeys` contain the signed
```

        panic
    }

    for _, step := range layout.Steps {

>         predicate := step.ExpectedPredicate {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        predicate := step.ExpectedPredicate
```
